Goal of the App
===============

Principia facilitates the definition of **high-level alignment intent** for
language models, based on the methodology introduced in Anthropic's
`Constitutional AI <https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06950>`_ paper.

The Problem
-----------

Aligning a language model to behave helpfully and safely traditionally requires
large amounts of human-labelled data, typically produced through crowd-sourcing.
Constitutional AI replaces most of that crowd-sourcing with a small set of
high-level principles (a *constitution*) authored by a handful of people. From
those principles, the method generates large amounts of training data
automatically via LLM self-critique.

Principia is the editor for that constitution and those examples.

Two-Phase Training
------------------

Phase 1 — Supervised Learning (SL)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The goal of the SL phase is to give the model a first alignment pass and
narrow the space that the later RL phase will need to explore.

The process works through **critique/revision steps**:

1. An LLM is given an exchange (a user message and an assistant response).
2. The LLM is prompted to **critique** the assistant's response — specifically
   whether it violates the intent of the constitution.
3. The LLM then formulates a **revised response** based on its own critique.
4. This revised response becomes the supervised fine-tuning target.

To guide the LLM toward useful critiques, the constitution is accompanied by
**few-shot examples** of critique/response pairs. Running multiple
critique/revision steps in sequence helps catch edge cases that a single pass
might miss.

Phase 2 — Reinforcement Learning (RL)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The RL phase frames alignment as a **binary preference classification** task:
given two responses to the same prompt, which is better?

Rather than asking humans, this preference signal is generated by an LLM guided
by the constitution. The model's output probabilities capture its preference
between the two responses, and those probabilities drive the RL reward signal.

Two design choices from the paper are central here:

- **Ensembling over constitution principles**: responses are compared against
  multiple distinct sections of the constitution and the preference scores are
  combined, reducing bias from any single principle.
- **Chain-of-Thought (CoT)**: the LLM reasons step-by-step before expressing
  a preference, improving the quality of the generated signal.

What Principia Manages
----------------------

Principia provides a structured interface for:

- Authoring and editing **constitution elements** (the high-level principles).
- Managing **few-shot examples** used to prime the critique/revision process.
- Running **prompt test chats** to interactively validate a constitution element
  before committing it to training.
- Running **example refinement chats** to iterate on individual training examples
  through guided critique/revision.
